this is the PTC system for simplifying
posterior dental Anatomy
it forms the foundation for all the ptc
training systems and it introduces the
terminology used for communication in
the dental laboratory when we have a
thorough understanding of the features
of the occlusal surfaces of the
posterior teeth we find that it is
simple to design and shape posterior
teeth quickly and with a high degree of
anatomical accuracy and aesthetic appeal
let's begin by learning the names of the
teeth the teeth of the maxilla or upper
jaw are called the maxillary teeth the
teeth of the mandible or lower jaw are
the mandibular teeth there are two basic
types of posterior teeth on each arch
bicuspids or premolars and molars the
molars come behind the premolars and
generally have four cusps on the biting
surface there are three pairs of molars
in each arch the first molars second
molars and third molars ezal is the
direction toward the midline of the
mouth following the curve of the arch
the surface facing toward the mesial is
the mesial surface
distel is the direction away from the
midline the distal surface faces toward
the distal ridges are long narrow
elevations there are three kinds of
ridges that we are concerned with Fossey
are concavities or depressions on the
occlusal surface so far we've learned
that all posterior teeth have the same
basic features what makes one tooth
different from another is the way that
those features are arranged
finally all upper molars and the lower
second and third molars have for oblique
cusps ridges and no transverse ridges
the lower first molar has five oblique
ridges matching its five cusps since
everything else depends on the proper
placement of the pits it's important
that you understand the placement of
each pit when you can visualize the pit
placement before you start your work
you'll end up with a tooth that is
functional and in harmony with the rest
of the teeth
start with an imaginary curved line
through the buccal cusp tips make a
parallel line from marginal Ridge to
marginal Ridge dividing the tooth in
half
on the lower first molar note the
intersections where the two buccal
grooves join the central groove for the
buccal dye sectional groove the
intersection is just mesial to the
central pit just buckle to the line for
the extra distal buccal groove it is
midway between the central and distal
pits just buckle to the line curve your
central D sectional groove from pit to
pit including these two extra
intersections because the crown is wider
than the root the emergence angle is
about 15 degrees to the long axis of the
tooth the long axis is an imaginary line
running vertically through the center of
the tooth the shape of the tooth where
it emerges from the gingiva is called
the emergence profile the emergence
profile starts just below the gingiva
and blends gradually into the axial
surface where the proximal walls
approach the contact areas a slight V
shape is formed this v-shaped space is
called an embrasure
for every transverse or oblique cusp
Ridge there will be two secondary
grooves that form the sides of the ridge
occasionally a single secondary groove
might define both a marginal Ridge and
the adjacent cusp Ridge whether you know
it or not you've learned the complete
occlusal Anatomy of the posterior teeth
and better than you think you have
you